We begin with the latest from the Russia-Ukraine border.
Secretary of State Antony Blinken
said today there has been, quote, "no meaningful pullback"
of Russian troops and that Russian President Vladimir
Putin could move in at any time.
For more, I want to bring in Ambassador of the European
Union to the United States, Stavros Lambrinidis.
Mr Ambassador, it's great to see you.
Help us set the stage.
I think most Americans have a hard time,
maybe Europeans do too, sifting through all the news
about troop movements, diplomacy, rhetoric.
From your vantage point, Mr Ambassador, where are we?
We're in a very tense situation, and this hasn't changed.
The Russian troops are still there.
Even if they have removed a few, which has not been verified,
we're talking about over 100,000 troops.
And we're having also the situation
on the ground in Ukraine that, even
before any military action, is, of course, very problematic.
The economy is suffering dramatically.
We see cyber attacks of major scale.
And we also, frankly, see people--
people who are at their homes today with a bag
packed in the entrance in the event
they have to evacuate their own house.
There's also a real human tragedy.
And this is not the 1940s, this is 2022.
And this is just simply unacceptable.
Mr Ambassador, there were reports today
of field hospitals being deployed.
Does that give you any higher level of concern?
Well, we've had these reports for a while.
Look, I know that yesterday some signs of possible
hope when Russia seemed to recognize
the validity of the Minsk Agreements and the need
to continue discussing the fact that they said they would be
finally sending a response to the letters
that NATO and the US sent to them with the proposals
of the European security.
At the same time, we're seeing many mixed signals.
The Duma yesterday in Russia asked President Putin
to recognize it as the pendant republics, Donetsk and Luhansk.
So, frankly, look, this is a crisis that Russia created.
We did not seek confrontation.
But we are totally prepared for it if it comes to that.
I think all of us here hope that Russia will not move to war,
will not bring violence again to Europe.
But if it does, it will face massive consequences.
And it will feel them.
Mr Ambassador, from an EU perspective,
what are the dangers--
economic, humanitarian, and otherwise--
of a full-blown Russian invasion?
The immediate dangers are very clear,
and we are preparing for them, including
for a humanitarian crisis in Ukraine,
for ensuring that we deal with any flows of people coming out.
But we have not given up on diplomacy,
as you can tell also from visits by the German
Chancellor, the French President, and others.
We do not think diplomacy is over.
But in order for it to work, we're
also signaling to Russia very clearly
that the consequences, if it chooses the path of war,
will be massive.
And Europeans, the 27 member states of the European Union
are, perhaps in an unprecedented way,
united behind the European Commission
in having put in place and discussing
the extent of robust, coordinated, massive sanctions
against Russia.
So for us, this is existential.
It must be understood, this is Europe.
And Ukraine is in Europe.
And Russia is not just simply threatening Ukraine.
But through Ukraine, it is, in effect,
threatening the right of countries in the 21st century
to be free, and independent, and to make their own decisions.
If that kind of blood affair succeeds,
then instability, and insecurity, and the potential
for war, not just in Europe, in the rest of the world,
is going to be much higher.
Might is not right, and we will make sure
that Russia, one way or the other, understands this.
Mr Ambassador, as a side issue, I
want to talk about energy and leverage.
There has been some commentary that Europe's move
toward renewable energy, for all sorts of understandable climate
change reasons, has left it without a reliable bridge
supply of fossil fuels.
And that has increased Russian leverage.
Agree, disagree that that is part of this larger equation?
Absolutely disagree.
But let me tell you something.
Russia has shown, even before this war crisis,
to be an unreliable supplier of gas to Europe.
And Europe, in fact, is ensuring its independence from Russia
by focusing on the energy resources that it can home
produce, which are, in fact, clean energy.
And what we have done in the past few months
has actually also very effective in ensuring
that if Russia decides to weaponize energy
in this particular crisis, we will be ready.
The imports of liquefied natural gas from many different sources
around the world in the past month
have increased at record levels.
We have built LNG terminals all over Europe since the 2014
invasion in Crimea.
And we are also massively expanding our electricity
interconnectors in Europe.
And that is going to allow us to take
all of that source of energy from LNG
and from the green sources and to transfer it
in every corner of Europe.
We are entirely sure that this winter,
no matter what Russia does, we are OK.
But we are building for the future.
If anything, this crisis shows that when we have committed
to move to green energy in the European Union,
this is not just a supremely important decision
for the future growth of the EU and for the world,
not just a supremely important decision for the planet
itself and for humans living on it, frankly,
but also a strategically important decision, which
is why when President Biden and the European Commission
president Von der Leyen issued a joint statement
a couple of weeks ago on this exact topic,
they focused both on energy security
and on the importance of the US and the EU moving
to a clean energy transition.
So picking up on that point, Mr Ambassador,
I wonder if it, from your perspective,
appears that NATO has been re-energized,
Europe had already focused, as you mentioned, since 2014,
on more energy independence from Russia.
But it's certainly accelerated that process, and maybe
the political will to do so has intensified.
Taking those two things just by themselves,
is Russia making a huge miscalculation here?
I think so.
I really think so.
I think Russia thought it could divide and conquer us.
And it has actually united the European Union and NATO
more than we have arguably been ever before.
And just to give you just one example of that unity.
Foreign minister of Russia, Lavrov,
sent 36 letters to the 36 countries of the European Union
and of NATO, asking them to answer separately
to his analysis about what the indivisibility
of European security is, clearly hoping to divide and conquer.
He sent 36 letters, he received two replies.
One from Josep Borrell, the European Union's Foreign Policy
Chief on behalf of every single one of the 27 EU member states,
and one from the Secretary General
of NATO, Mr. Stoltenberg.
Now, if Russia needed more proof that its attempts to divide
are failing, it couldn't have gotten a clearer signal.
You have implied this, but I just
want to nail you down on this, Mr Ambassador--
that the European Union and Europe broadly will
unhesitatingly join the United States
in the unprecedented economic sanctions
President Biden has promised if, in fact, Russia invades.
The answer is, yes.
And if you like, one more thing that maybe President Putin
was not counting on is how remarkable the coordination
between the European Union and the United States
has been during this crisis.
We are speaking almost every day at the highest levels
and technical levels to nail down all the consequences
that Russia will face.
We have committed to massive and coordinated sanctions.
They will not just simply touch individuals, although they
will touch those as well.
But they will touch also major areas
of the Russian economy, whether it is energy,
or whether it is the financial sector.
And most importantly, they will also deal a major blow
to Russia's hope to wean its economy away from the gas
that it has now, and the oil, and do something else,
because they will need the technology
that the US and the EU have, almost exclusively to do so,
and they will not be getting it.
So this, we tell Russia all the time and the Russian people,
is not the only path.
If Russia does not choose war, and it's in its hands
entirely to do so--
if it chooses the negotiation path,
there is a bright potential future
in this relationship that will bring prosperity
to the Russian people.
And this is precisely what we are committed to.
But if it chooses war, as I said before, we are prepared.
I must tell you, Mr Ambassador, in my conversations this week
here in Washington with lawmakers,
briefed by the White House, they would, I would say,
describe themselves as gloomy, expecting an invasion maybe
this week, maybe this weekend.
And they fear Russia won't stop after Ukraine.
What is your assessment?
Well, precisely because we share the same fear.
I said before that this is an existential crisis for us.
And it is exactly the reason that you see the European
Union so remarkably strong and united
behind averting this crisis.
I am not, and Mr. Putin said no one is--
I do not know what he's thinking about.
But the fact of the matter is that he does
have two paths to choose from.
And the fact of the matter is that if he thought
that what he is doing now is going
to do anything other than strengthen NATO
and strengthen the European Union,
he has failed in that calculation.
So I do believe, as I said at the beginning,
that we are still in a major crisis.
And I do believe that it's entirely possible that Russia
will choose the path to war.
And this is why the signal we're sending to them
is if you do so, it's going to be a remarkable violent period
for Europe that is going to cost you,
both in real economic terms and historically,
a price that you've never paid in the recent history
of Russia.
It's going to ensure that Europe, which
is Russia's neighbor, is going to move away from Russia
for a very long time.
It's going to assure that Russia is
going to suffer economic consequences they will have
to claw out of, perhaps by seeking alliances
around the world that in normal circumstances,
it would feel quite uncomfortable in.
And it will mean that the Russian people, who absolutely
have nothing to be blamed for for the Kremlin's adventurism
may also suffer in return.
And that is just simply something we do not want.
It's entirely Mr. Putin's decision.
Stavros Lambrinidis, the European Union Ambassador
to the United States--
Mr Ambassador, thank you so much for your time
and your perspective.
Thank you very much.